---
title: Python Development in VSCode Using Devcontainer
published: true
description: Learn how to set up and use a devcontainer-based environment for Python development in VSCode using the devcontainer-python-template.
tags: 'devcontainer, docker, python, vscode'
series: vscode
id: 2128844
date: '2024-12-01T04:07:12Z'
---

## Python Development in VSCode Using Devcontainer

In this guide, we'll walk you through the steps to set up and use the **devcontainer-python-template** for Python development in a Docker-based development environment using Visual Studio Code (VSCode). This template allows you to get up and running quickly with a Python project inside a devcontainer.

Instead of cloning the repository directly, you'll create your own repository based on the template, so you can push your changes back to your own repository.

### 1. Create a New Repository from the Template

- Go to the devcontainer-python-template repository: <https://github.com/jdevto/devcontainer-python-template>.
- Click on the Use this template button, located near the top-right of the repository page.
- Select **Create a new repository**.
- Fill out the repository details:
  - **Repository Name**: Choose a name for your new project, e.g., python-flask-web-app.
  - **Description**: Optionally, add a description of your repository.
  - **Visibility**: Choose whether your repository will be Public or Private.
  - **Owner**: (Optional) If you're creating the repository under an organization, choose the appropriate owner (your account or an organization).
- Click Create repository from template.

This will create a new repository on your GitHub account, initialized with the contents of the devcontainer-python-template.

### 2. Clone Your New Repository Locally

- Now that you've created a new repository, open VSCode.
- Clone your newly created repository to your local machine:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:jdevto/python-flask-web-app.git
cd python-flask-web-app
```

It's always a best practice to create a branch and work from it.

```bash
git branch dev
git checkout dev
```

### 3. Open the Repository in VSCode and Start the Devcontainer

- Open the Repository in VSCode:
  - After cloning your repository, open it in Visual Studio Code.
  - In the VSCode menu, go to the Activity Bar and click Remote Explorer.
  - Select Reopen in Container. This will build and launch the development container (devcontainer) defined in the .devcontainer folder.
- What Happens During Setup: VSCode will automatically:
  - Build the Docker container as specified in the devcontainer.json configuration file.
  - Install any dependencies (e.g., Python packages) listed in requirements.txt or other project files.
  - Open the project within a clean, isolated development environment inside the container.
- Output on Successful Setup: If the .devcontainer setup is successful, you should see output similar to the following:

  ```bash
  Running the postCreateCommand from devcontainer.json...

  [7382 ms] Start: Run in container: /bin/sh -c .devcontainer/scripts/postCreate.sh
  Linux 726a838654fd 6.8.0-49-generic #49~22.04.1-Ubuntu SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC Wed Nov  6 17:42:15 UTC 2 x86_64 GNU/Linux
  Done. Press any key to close the terminal.
  ```

- Open the Terminal:

  - Close and reopen the terminal in the same VSCode window.
  - You should see a prompt like this:

    ```bash
    root ➜ /workspaces/python-flask-web-app (main) $
    ```

### 4. Validate Python Is Working

Before proceeding, ensure Python is working correctly inside the devcontainer:

- Open the integrated terminal in VSCode.
- Run the following command to check the Python version:

  ```bash
  python --version
  ```

- You should see an output like:

  ```bash
  Python 3.12.7
  ```

### 5. Run the Test Python Script

The template includes a simple test script located at hello/main.py. Run this script to validate the setup and ensure Python is executing correctly:

- In the terminal, run the test script:

  ```bash
  python hello/main.py
  ```

- Expected output:

  ```bash
  Hello, Devcontainer!
  ```

### 6. Cleanup

Once you confirm Python is working and the test script runs successfully:

- Remove the Test Script: If you no longer need the test script, delete the hello directory:

  ```bash
  rm -rf hello
  ```

- Update the LICENSE file as desired

### 7. Flask Web App Development

- Update README.md file with the following contents:

  ```markdown
  # python-flask-web-app

  A simple demo showcasing a Python Flask web application running in a VSCode development container. This setup is designed to provide an isolated, portable, and consistent environment for Python development.
  ```

- Create the Project Directory
  - Create a folder to hold your project.

    ```bash
    mkdir flask-web-app
    cd flask-web-app
    ```

- Set Up a Virtual Environment
  - Set up a Python virtual environment to manage dependencies.

    ```bash
    python -m venv venv
    source venv/bin/activate
    ```

- Install Flask
  - Install Flask in the virtual environment.

    ```bash
    pip install flask
    ```

  - Create a requirements.txt file to track dependencies.

    ```bash
    pip freeze > requirements.txt
    ```

- Create the App
  - Create app.py file.

    ```bash
    touch app.py
    ```
  
  - Update app.py file with the following contents:

    ```python
    from flask import Flask, render_template

    app = Flask(__name__)

    @app.route('/')
    def hello():
        return render_template('base.html', content="Hello, Flask!")

    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.run(debug=True)
    ```

- Run the App
  - Run the app to validate the setup.

    ```bash
    python app.py
    ```

  - You should see something like this:

    ```bash
    (venv) root ➜ /workspaces/python-flask-web-app/flask-web-app (main) $ python app.py 
    * Serving Flask app 'app'
    * Debug mode: on
    WARNING: This is a development server. Do not use it in a production deployment. Use a production WSGI server instead.
    * Running on http://127.0.0.1:5000
    Press CTRL+C to quit
    * Restarting with stat
    * Debugger is active!
    * Debugger PIN: 401-040-302
    ```

  - Open `http://127.0.0.1:5000` in your browser. You should see "Hello, World!".

- Expand the Project Structure

  As the app evolves, add a directory structure that supports templates, static files, and tests.
  - Create the following structure:

    ```bash
    flask-web-app/
    ├── app.py
    ├── requirements.txt
    ├── templates/
    │   └── base.html
    └── README.md
    ```

    ```bash
    mkdir templates
    touch templates/base.html
    ```

  - Update base.html file with the following contents:

    ```html
    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>

    <head>
      <title>Flask Web App</title>
    </head>

    <body>
      <h1>Welcome to Flask Web App</h1>
      <p>{{ content }}</p>
    </body>

    </html>
    ```

  - Run the Flask App Again
    Run the app again to test the updated version.

    ```bash
    python app.py
    ```

  - Open a browser and navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:5000`.
  - You should see something like this:

    ```bash
    Welcome to Flask Web App
    Hello, Flask!
    ```

- Environment Cleanup
  When you're done testing and running the Flask app:
  - Stop the Flask Server
    - Press **Ctrl + C** in the terminal where the Flask app is running. This will terminate the server process.
  - Exit out of the Development Environment
    - In VSCode, press Ctrl+Shift+P (or Cmd+Shift+P on macOS) to open the Command Palette.
    - Type **Reopen Folder in SSH** and select the option. This ensures that you're out of the development container and back to your local environment, enabling seamless workflow integration for any additional tasks outside the container.

### 8. Push the branch to GitHub

- Execute

```bash
git add --all
git commit -m "feat: update Flask web app" \
  -m "Refactor app and add hello flask route"
git push origin dev
```

### 9. Create a Pull Request (PR)

Navigate to Your Repository on GitHub

- Visit your repository on GitHub.

Go to the "Pull Requests" Tab

- Click on the "Pull Requests" tab at the top of the repository page.

Create a New Pull Request

- Click the "New Pull Request" button.

Select Branches for the PR

- **Base branch**: Choose the branch you want to merge into (e.g., main or production).
- **Compare branch**: Select the branch you just pushed (e.g., dev).

Open Pull Request Creation

- Click "Create pull request".

Review the Changes

- Review the list of commits and files changed to ensure everything looks correct.

Add a Title and Description

- Provide a concise and descriptive title (e.g., feat: update template dev).

- Add a description with any necessary details (e.g., reasons for changes, references to issues, etc.).

Finalize the Pull Request

- Click "Create pull request" again to confirm.

Review and Approve the PR

- Self-review your changes or request reviews from teammates.

Merge the Pull Request

- Once everything looks good, navigate to the PR and click "Merge Pull Request".
- Confirm the merge by clicking "Confirm merge".

Here is a repository I created by following the steps in this article:

[https://github.com/jdevto/python-flask-web-app](https://github.com/jdevto/python-flask-web-app)
